Once you understand the types of machine learning algorithms for 2D imaging,
you can start to get creative with how you apply them.
Keep in mind that not every algorithm is useful.
AI for 2D imaging is most effective when it can be
applied to helping radiologists to read critical studies faster,
reduce their burnout and reading fatigue,
and help them make more accurate assessments.
Let's go over several different applications where
machine learning could have a positive clinical impact.
First, let's look at how
a machine-learning algorithm could help reduce radiologists burnout.
Do you know that millions of mammographies are taken each year in the US?
Each image actually, by law,
requires two radiologists to read it,
but about 85 percent of them are normal.
What this means is that highly skilled radiologists are spending
a lot of time just reading normal studies which can lead to burnout.
Having a machine learning classification algorithm to serve
as a second reader could reduce radiologists burnout.
We discussed earlier that algorithms can't yet replace radiologists.
But in this situation,
since there would still be a second human reader,
it could be a special case where AI could be used in a way that
technically replaces a radiologist in the workflow if its accuracy is high enough.
The second machine-learning application would be
the optimization of image reading workflows in the emergency room.
Radiologists read images in a first-in-first-out queue,
which means that images delivered to them first
will be read first under all circumstances.
However, emergency cases such as
brain bleeds are fatal and they need to be discovered quickly,
otherwise, patients could die before their images even get read.
In order to avoid this,
we could have a classification algorithm that reads the image as
soon as it is acquired and pushes critical cases to the top of the queue.
In the exercise that you do at the end of this lesson,
you will actually reorder a radiologist queue based on results from
classification algorithms and you will see how
machine learning makes a difference in optimizing clinical workflows.
Another great area where machine learning algorithms can have
a clinical impact is in helping to assess tumor growth over time.
Patients who have lung cancer,
often undergo chemotherapy to kill lung tumors.
If the therapy is working,
we expect that the tumor will shrink and the number of lung nodules will decrease.
Segmentation algorithms can assist radiologists in calculating
the area of tumors and counting the number of lung nodules overtime.